This `README.md` file was generated on 2024-05-08 by Justine Lang

## GENERAL INFORMATION

1.  Title of the Project: Managing Human-Wildlife Interactions: Ecological and Financial Assessment of Elk Feedground Closure in Teton County

2.  Author Information

A. Primary Contact Information 
Name: Justine Lang; Role: Data Manager; Institution: Bren School of Environmental Science & Management, University of California, Santa Barbara; Email: justinelang@bren.ucsb.edu  

B. Alternate Contact Information 
Name: Katherine Aristi; Role: Project Manager; Institution: Bren School of Environmental Science & Management, University of California, Santa Barbara; Email: katherinearisti@bren.ucsb.edu

Name: Delores Chan; Role: Communications Manager; Institution: Bren School of Environmental Science & Management, University of California, Santa Barbara; Email: deloreschan@bren.ucsb.edu

Name: Samuel Desre; Role: Financial Manager; Institution: Bren School of Environmental Science & Management, University of California, Santa Barbara; Email: samueldesre@bren.ucsb.edu

3.  Date of data collection: 2023-04-03 - 2024-03-22

4.  Geographic location of data collection: Teton County, WY and the broader Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem, USA

5.  Information about funding sources that supported the collection of the data: No funding was acquired. 

## SHARING/ACCESS INFORMATION

1.  Licenses/restrictions placed on the data: No restrictions are placed on the data generated by this project. For the letters used in the sentiment analysis: Public comments for the Draft Elk Feedground Management Plan can be requested from the Wyoming Game and Fish Department (wgf.inforequest@wyo.gov). Public comments for the National Elk Refuge are publicly available on regulations.gov.  

2.  Links to publications that cite or use the data: Aristi, K., Chan, D, Lang, J., & Desre, S. (2024). Managing Human-Wildlife Interactions: Ecological and Financial Assessment of Elk Feedground Closure in Teton County [Master’s Thesis Equivalent, Bren School of Environmental Science & Management, University of California, Santa Barbara]. https://bren.ucsb.edu/projects/managing-human-wildlife-interactions-ecological-and-financial-assessment-elk-feedground 

3.  Links to other publicly accessible locations of the data: Related data used in this project are archived in Dryad: https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.98sf7m0rx 

4.  Was data derived from another source? If yes, list source(s): 

A. Financial_Repercussions
- agcensus22.csv: Tabular data were pulled from the 2022 USDA Census of Agriculture (https://www.nass.usda.gov/Publications/AgCensus/2022/Full_Report/Volume_1,_Chapter_2_County_Level/Wyoming/st56_2_011_011.pdf) 
- fund_code.Rmd and quarantine_code.Rmd: Code was adapted from Python code by Ben Foster (bentfoster@gmail.com). Hay price and consumption parameters were informed by Selk, 2022 (https://www.drovers.com/news/beef-production/how-much-hay-will-cow-consume-estimate-your-winter-feed-needs), the National Integrated Drought Information System, 2022 (https://www.drought.gov/sites/default/files/2022-07/Western-Drought-Status-Update-July-2022.pdf), and the National Agriculture Statistics Service, 2022 (https://www.nass.usda.gov/Statistics_by_State/Wyoming/Publications/Brochures/Wyoming%20Hay%20Facts%202022.pdf)

B. Sentiment_Analysis
- Requested WGFD public comments and survey responses for the Draft Elk Feedground Management Plan from the Public Affairs Office of Wyoming Game and Fish Department. 
- Downloaded public comments submitted on regulations.gov for the “Intent To Prepare an Updated Bison and Elk Management Plan for the National Elk Refuge in Wyoming; Environmental Impact Statement” (https://www.regulations.gov/document/FWS-R6-NWRS-2023-0062-0001/comment)

C. Transmission_Risk
- cattle_reactor_code_final.Rmd: Functions and most parameters were adapted from Kauffman et al., 2016 (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.prevetmed.2016.08.004). Current elk-cattle overlap was informed by the USDA Animal Health and Plant Inspection Service, 2023 (https://www.aphis.usda.gov/aphis/ourfocus/animalhealth/animal-disease-information/cattle-disease-information/tuberculosis-brucellosis-monthly-report). Jackson elk seroprevalence was informed by Merkle et al., 2017 (https://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2664.13022). Female elk proportion was informed by Eric Cole, USFWS (eric_cole@fws.gov)

5.  Recommended citation for the project: Lang, J., Chan, D., Desre, S., & Aristi, K. (2024). Managing Human-Wildlife Interactions: Ecological and Financial Assessment of Elk Feedground Closure in Teton County [GitHub Repository]. GitHub. https://github.com/justinelang/elkentourage_gp 

## DATA & FILE OVERVIEW

1.  File List: 

A. Financial_Repercussions
- agcensus22.csv: Teton County cattle census data pulled from the 2022 USDA Census of Agriculture."ranch" is cattle ranch FID. "herd" is cattle herd size. 
- fund_code.Rmd: functions to calculate brucellosis compensation fund size
- quarantine_code.Rmd: functions to calculate the cost of quarantining cattle under different brucellosis risk scenarios

B. Sentiment_Analysis
- NER PDFs: folder with copies of the PDFs downloaded from regulations.gov. These are comment letters written by the Coalition of Local Governments, Defenders of Wildlife, Friends of Animals, Gallatin Wildlife Association, Greater Yellowstone Coalition, Safari Club International, Wyoming Department of Environmental Quality, and Wyoming Wildlife Advocates. An overview of the contents of each letter can be found within the Excel file (NER Comment Organization.xlsx) within the folder. 
- NER_scripts: folder with code to run sentiment analyses on comment letters submitted for the NER’s Notice of Intent to re-evaluate the elk feedground. There is one Rmd per NER PDF.
- WGFD PDFs: folder with copies of the comment letter and survey response PDFs sent by WGFD following written request. There are letters written by private citizens and also non-governmental organizations. The survey responses are organized in a .csv file with responses to questions asked. 
- WGFD_scripts: folder with code to run sentiment analyses on comment letters submitted for the WGFD’s Draft Elk Feedground Management Plan. There is one Rmd per WGFD PDF. 

C. Transmission_Risk
- cattle_reactor_code_final.Rmd: functions to calculate brucellosis transmission risk under different elk-to-cattle overlap and elk seroprevalence scenarios

2.  Relationship between files, if important:
- fund_code.Rmd uses agcensus22.csv
- cattle_reactor_code_final.Rmd output informs fund_code.Rmd and quarantine_code.Rmd input
- quarantine_code.Rmd output informs fund_code.Rmd input
- each sentiment analysis Rmd file has an associated comment letter PDF

## METHODOLOGICAL INFORMATION

1.  Description of methods used for collection/generation of data: All data used to inform parameters and code were pulled or adapted from literature and consultations with experts. See sources listed above. 

2.  Methods for processing the data:

A. Financial_Repercussions: Using different brucellosis risk scenarios (years between cattle cases) modeled with cattle_reactor_code_final.Rmd, quarantine_code.Rmd was run to calculate the cost of cattle quarantine based on cattle case frequency. This output was input into fund_code.Rmd to calculate the size of a brucellosis compensation fund in USD. See "Calculations for Change in Brucellosis Costs in Teton County" within the final report for additional methods and a table of parameters.  

B. Sentiment_Analysis: Public comments were read through and then analyzed for general sentiments and attitudes. Letters were also analyzed for ideas and suggestions that respondents offered. PDFs of the public comments were then read into the Rmd files located within NER_scripts and WGFD_scripts, where sentiment analyses were performed using the NRC Word-Emotion Association Lexicon from Saif Mohammad and Peter Turney. See "Elk Feedground Public Sentiment Analysis" within the final report for additional methods.

C. Transmission_Risk: With different elk-cattle overlap and elk seroprevalence inputs (low, medium, high), cattle_reactor_code_final.Rmd was run to simulate brucellosis tranmission risk scenarios. Output is number of years between cattle reactors. See the markdown file and "Brucellosis Transmission Risk Model" within the final report for additional methods and a table of parameters. 

3.  Instrument- or software-specific information needed to interpret the data:
- R Core Team (2023). R: A language and environment for statistical computing (Version 4.2.3) [Software]. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria.  https://www.R-project.org/ 
- Posit team. (2023). RStudio: Integrated Development Environment for R. [Software]. PBC, Boston, MA. http://www.posit.co/ 
- Mohammad, S., & Turney, P. (2013). Crowdsourcing a word-emotion association lexicon. Computational Intelligence, 29(3), 436-465. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1308.6297 
- R packages used include `tidyverse`, `here`, `tidytext`, `textdata`, and `pdftools`

4.  People involved with sample collection, processing, analysis and/or submission: Katherine Aristi, Delores Chan, Justine Lang, and Samuel Desre. 
